A central question in many probabilistic clustering problems is how many distinct clusters are present
in a particular dataset. Bayesian nonparametrics (BNP) addresses this question by placing a generative
process on cluster assignment, making the number of distinct clusters present amenable to Bayesian
inference. However, like all Bayesian approaches, BNP requires the specification of a prior, and
this prior may favor a greater or fewer number of distinct clusters. In practice, it is important to
quantitatively establish that the prior is not too informative, particularly when—as is often the case in
BNP—the particular form of the prior is chosen for mathematical convenience rather than because of
a considered subjective belief.

We derive local sensitivity measures for a truncated variational Bayes (VB) approximation based on the
Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence. Local sensitivity measures approximate the nonlinear dependence
of a VB optimum on prior parameters using a local Taylor series approximation [Gustafson, 1996b,
Giordano et al., 2017]. Using a stick-breaking representation of a Dirichlet process, we consider
perturbations both to the scalar concentration parameter and to the functional form of the stick-
breaking distribution. As far as the authors are aware, ours is the first analysis of the local sensitivity
of BNP posteriors when using a VB approximation.

Unlike previous work on local Bayesian sensitivity for BNP [Basu, 2000], we pay special attention
to the ability of our sensitivity measures to extrapolate to different priors, rather than treating the
sensitivity as a measure of robustness per se. Extrapolation motivates the use of multiplicative
perturbations to the functional form of the prior for VB, as the KL divergence is then linear in
the perturbation. Additionally, we linearly approximate only the computationally intensive part of
inference—the optimization of the global parameters—and retain the non-linearity of easily computed
quantities.

We apply our methods to estimate sensitivity of the expected number of distinct clusters present the
Iris dataset [Anderson, 1936, Fisher, 1936] to the BNP prior specification. We evaluate the accuracy
of our approximations by comparing to the much more expensive process of re-fitting the model.
