\begin{abstract}{% This is the title of my talk/poster
Evaluating Sensitivity to the Stick Breaking Prior in Bayesian Nonparametrics
}{Ryan}{Giordano}{UC Berkeley, USA}
{Runjing Liu, UC Berkeley, USA, Michael I.~Jordan, UC Berkeley, USA, Tamara Broderick, MIT, USA}

A central question in many probabilistic clustering problems is how many
distinct clusters are present in a particular dataset. Bayesian nonparametrics
(BNP) addresses this question by placing a generative process on cluster
assignment, making the number of distinct clusters present amenable to Bayesian
inference. However, like all Bayesian approaches, BNP requires the specification
of a prior, and this prior may favor a greater or fewer number of distinct
clusters. In practice, it is important to quantitatively establish that the
prior is not too informative, particularly when—as is often the case in BNP—the
particular form of the prior is chosen for mathematical convenience rather than
because of a considered subjective belief.

We derive local sensitivity measures for a truncated variational Bayes
approximation based on the Kullback-Leibler divergence. Local sensitivity
measures approximate the nonlinear dependence of a VB optimum on prior
parameters using a local Taylor series approximation. Using a stick-breaking
representation of a Dirichlet process, we consider perturbations both to the
scalar concentration parameter and to the functional form of the stick- breaking
distribution.

In the design and evaluation of our local sensitivity measures we pay special
attention to our ability to accurately extrapolate to different priors, rather
than treating the sensitivity as a measure of robustness per se. Extrapolation
motivates the use of multiplicative perturbations to the functional form of the
prior for VB, as the KL divergence is then linear in the perturbation.
Additionally, we linearly approximate only the computationally intensive part of
inference—the optimization of the global parameters—and retain the non-linearity
of easily computed quantities.s

We apply our methods to real and simulated datasets to estimate sensitivity of
the expected number of distinct clusters present to the BNP prior specification,
evaluating the accuracy of our approximations by comparing to the much more
expensive process of re-fitting the model.

\end{abstract} 
